Feature/flash blocks (#718)
streamingfast/substreams: docs/new/references/flashblocks.md

> ---

Reviewer: Let's remove `(alpha) ...` from the SUMMARY page.

In the page itself, `(alpha)` should be at the end `Flashblocks Support (alpha)`. 

And the description and the title are similar, not sure the description is worth it here, at least not if we keep the same text.

<img width="563" height="147" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cbf7269a-aec6-4ddb-885e-7a3444e78389" />

description: Flashblocks support (alpha feature)
---

New support for "Flashblocks" is now available for alpha testing on Base Mainnet.

> ref: https://docs.base.org/base-chain/flashblocks/apps

Reviewer: This renders not super well with `ref`. A real sentence with a link to the spec seems more appropriate

## Disclaimers

* The only endpoint supporting Flashblocks is `https://base-mainnet-flash.streamingfast.io:443`.
* That endpoint is not guaranteed to be stable or available at all times.
* The protocol might still change in the next few weeks, as we gather feedback on usage.

> * Flashblocks coming from Firehose or Substreams endpoint should not be considered final data. Only write to database data coming from full blocks: there is no "undo" mechanism for Flashblocks.

Reviewer: We can probably render it in a box like with this syntax:

```
{% hint style="warning" %}
**Disclaimers**

* The only endpoint supporting Flashblocks is `https://base-mainnet-flash.streamingfast.io:443`.
* That endpoint is not guaranteed to be stable or available at all times.
* The protocol might still change in the next few weeks, as we gather feedback on usage.
Comment view* Flashblocks coming from Firehose or Substreams endpoint should not be considered final data. Only write to database data coming from full blocks: there is no "undo" mechanism for Flashblocks.
{% endhint %}
```

## Description

* Flashblocks are partial blocks that are not fully confirmed yet. 

> * They are emitted every 200ms and contain a fraction of the transactions that will be in the final block.

Reviewer: Real sentences and not bullets. Let's list also some of the benefits of consuming partial blocks

### Flashblocks in Substreams

#### Partial Blocks

> * In Substreams, Flashblocks are called **partial blocks**, as a generalization of the concept, even though Flashblocks are the only supported implementation yet.

Reviewer: After this point, we should try to also refer to partial blocks and not flashblocks, there is a few still mention of flashblocks after that.

* To benefit from partial blocks: 
  1. you need the latest version of substreams CLI or library.

>   2. your substreams modules should avoid doing "block-level aggregations" and should only work on what is inside the "transactionTraces"

Reviewer: Don't see the point to bullet points here (the parent ones, the child ones `1., 2.` are fine.)

Reviewer: Also it's usually more approriate to have all numbered list as 1., the Markdown rendered takes care of putting the right numbers, make it easier to edit and refactor.

Here's how it works:

> 1. The "sequencer* emits a flash block every 200ms (so a maximum of 10 per block height)

Reviewer 2: You have a The "sequencer*
Change the * to "

> 2. The instrumented Base node reader sends the increasing versions of the block same block to the Substreams engine and eventually, the full block.

Reviewer 2: remove the duplicated word "block" in middle of sentence

3. To keep up with the chain, it may skip a few emissions of partial blocks, but will never send the transactions out-of-order.

> 4. The Substreams engine will remember what was processed for each active substreams and only process the new transactions since the last execution.

Reviewer 2: capitalize S in Substreams

> 5. It sends the PartialData for each part of the full block as it gets it from the flash blocks

Reviewer: The `PartialData` is not clear here, maybe link to `buf.build` Protobuf directly here would example the curious reader to make the link with Protobuf.

6. If there is a reorg, new and undo signals are sent for the full blocks, but there is no consideration for the sent partial blocks. The user must always consider that the partial blocks data may become invalid.
7. For this reason, there is no "cursor" sent with the partial blocks data.

> #### Changes to Protobuf models

Reviewer: Proper links to buf.build would be welcomed here.

> * Partial blocks are not sent as `BlockScopedData`, but as `PartialBlockData`, which is new possible type for `Response.message`

Reviewer: `which is new possible type for` -> `which is a new possible type for`?

```proto
message PartialBlockData {
  MapModuleOutput output = 1;
  sf.substreams.v1.Clock clock = 2;
  uint32 partial_index = 3;
}
```

> * The `sf.substreams.rpc.v2.Blocks/Request`  and `sf.substreams.rpc.v3.Blocks/Request` now contain these parameters:

Reviewer: Let's decide if we ship it in `v2` or force `v3` (my preference)

> ``` proto

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```proto
```

> ``` proto

Reviewer: Need indents on your code block, when rendered, it's not aligned with the bullet

<img width="829" height="256" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b5567d13-cc78-4335-ba71-9b99a9ed1630" />

// If true, partial blocks are also sent on the stream
bool include_partial_blocks = 15;

// If true, only partial blocks are sent, no 'block-scoped-data' or cursor.
// This value supersedes include_partial_blocks
bool partial_blocks_only = 16;
```

#### Example

For the hypothetical scenario where 

> * a block #123 is being emitted as partial blocks

Reviewer: Capitalize each bullet sentence

* each partial block contains exactly 10 new transactions (to simplify the example)
* the Substreams engine receives only the blocks with index 2, 4, 7 (to ensure that we keep up with the chain)

> * finally, it receives followed by the full block #123

Reviewer 2: remove word "receives"

The module will be executed 4 times with partial data:
  1. with transactions 0-20
  2. with transactions 20-40
  3. with transactions 40-70
  4. with transaction 70-100 (when it gets the full block)
  
Then, the module will be executed again with the full block data. This is the data that will be used to apply changes to the stores, to ensure consistency before we execute the next blocks.
      
The user will receive:

1. The result of execution of trx 0-20, within PartialBlockData with Clock(num=123, ID=0xaaaaaaaaa) and PartialIndex=2
2. The result of execution of trx 20-40, within PartialBlockData with Clock(num=123, ID=0xbbbbbbbbbb) and PartialIndex=4
3. The result of execution of trx 40-70, within PartialBlockData with Clock(num=123, ID=0xcccccccccc) and PartialIndex=7

> 4. The result of execution of trx 70-100, within PartialBlockData with Clock(num=123, ID=0xdddddddddd) and PartialIndex=10

Reviewer: Use some backticks here and there to improve general rendering, probably on `PartialBlockData` `Clock(...)` and `PartialIndex`

If the user requested `include_partial_blocks` (and NOT `partial_blocks_only`), they will also receive:

> 5. The result of execution of trx 0-100, within BlockData with Clock (num=123, ID=0xdddddddddd) <- Note that the ID here is the same

Reviewer: > <- Note that the ID here is the same

Same as what?

> 

Reviewer: I think it would be good to have a section about `Substreams Development Consideration` or something like that where we discuss:

- The fact that full block are received but they contains only N transactions
- That stores are computed but aren't fully correct?

Stuff like that.

> ## Using Flashblocks

Reviewer: ```
## Consuming partial blocks
```

For the duality about `Developing for partial blocks` (the section I named `Substreams Development Consideration`, I see the two sides of the coin).

### A simple test, from terminal, with `substreams run`

> 1. Get the latest release of substreams: https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams/releases/tag/v1.17.8

Reviewer 2: Capitalize Substreams

2. To test with a common module, using `jq` to quickly see what is going on (you need [jq](https://jqlang.org/)):

> `substreams run -e https://base-mainnet-flash.streamingfast.io ethereum_common all_events -s -1 --include-partial-blocks -o jsonl | jq -r '"Block: #\(.["@block"]) Partial: \(.["@partial_index"]) Event count:\(.["@data"].events|length)"'`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`substreams run -e https://base-mainnet-flash.streamingfast.io ethereum_common@latest all_events -s -1 --include-partial-blocks -o jsonl | jq -r '"Block: #\(.["@block"]) Partial: \(.["@partial_index"]) Event count:\(.["@data"].events|length)"'`
```

I'm not a big fan of this big `jq` thing seems overly complicated. I understand the final output rendering is better though.

Block: #39306108 Partial: 9 Event count:121
Block: #39306108 Partial: 10 Event count:77
Block: #39306108 Partial: null Event count:1401
```

When you see "partial: null" it means that it is the actual full block.

3. To see how it performs with a clock, you can use, as always, the -o clock with something like this:

`substreams run -e https://base-mainnet-flash.streamingfast.io https://github.com/graphprotocol/graph-node/raw/refs/heads/master/substreams/substreams-head-tracker/substreams-head-tracker-v1.0.0.spkg -s -1 -o clock --include-partial-blocks`

This will print lines like this:
```
----------- PARTIAL BLOCK #39,306,388 (idx=7) (bcbcc30d0d6f4d5581519f0da90fe8b61ab8ae4e38193c1714285bee2be5cb98) age=-484.276ms ---------------
----------- PARTIAL BLOCK #39,306,388 (idx=9) (0399532628e8b7585c53a58b3bce5d6432fc76b3aee4730292ab4cef8c675ccf) age=-181.9ms ---------------
----------- PARTIAL BLOCK #39,306,388 (idx=10) (c7871f81180ad6565ae6f9c4d244b2dcac05b2348aff54bd591a65d6c945107e) age=1.138322s ---------------
----------- BLOCK #39,306,388 (c7871f81180ad6565ae6f9c4d244b2dcac05b2348aff54bd591a65d6c945107e) age=1.138495s ---------------
```

> See the "negative age", that's because at partial block with idx=5, the proposed block timestamp is still 2 seconds in the future.

Reviewer: Maybe we should not print `age` on partial then ...

Reviewer: Let's at least render it as note for now:

```
{% hint style="note" %}
...
{% endhint %}
```

> See the "negative age", that's because at partial block with idx=5, the proposed block timestamp is still 2seconds in the future.

Reviewer 2: Missing space after 2

### A more useful example, with the Substreams Webhook Sink:

> 1. Get the latest release of substreams: https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams/releases/tag/v1.17.8

Reviewer 2: Capitalize Substreams

2. Run this command:

`substreams sink webhook --partial-blocks-only -e https://base-mainnet-flash.streamingfast.io http://webhook.example.com path-to-your.spkg  -s -1`

Enjoy!

> ### More sinks

Reviewer: I think it would be good to "expand" that here and show it inline. It would also remove most of the `### More sinks` section actually.

It would probably be good to also update the Substreams JS SDK for this.

> The flash block support is not implemented in other sinks. For example, we believe that it would be a bad idea to implement in the SQL sink, because it would cause too many "undo" operations.

Reviewer 2: Would change to start with "Flashblock support is not..."

> If you have your own sink implementation that uses github.com/streamingfast/substreams/sink, you can simply:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are using our [Golang Substreams Sink SDK](https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams/blob/develop/sink/README.md#substreams-sink), you can simply:
```

  - Bump to the latest version of substreams in your go.mod (1.17.8 and above)
  - Define your sink flags with `sink.FlagIncludePartialBlocks` and/or `sink.FlagPartialBlocksOnly` under `FlagIncludeOptional()`
  - Implement the function `HandlePartialBlockData(...)` and pass it to `NewSinkerFullHandlersWithPartial(...)` when creating the sinker.

>   - Enjoy!

Reviewer: Cute but not needed :)
